rm: security: boot software updates for stm32mp1 (#424)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/security/boot-software-updates-stm32mp1.rst

.. highlight:: sh

.. _ref-boot-software-updates-stm32mp1:

Boot Software Updates on STM32MP1
=================================

Boot artifacts
--------------

STM32 TF-A BL2 image
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**TF-A BL2** image is the first boot image loaded by application processor
trusted ROM. It's in charge of loading the next-stage images (secure and
non-secure) and preliminary initialization of required peripherals:

- SoC clocks, DRAM
- Security IPs: memory firewalls, crypto engines
- Storage (MMC, QSPI etc).

**TF-A BL2** image is prepended with `STM32 header <https://wiki.st.com/stm32mpu/wiki/STM32_header_for_binary_files>`_.

It can also be signed using STM32 Signing tool.

TF-A FIP image
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Trusted Firmware-A FIP (Firmware Image Package) is a name for the signed
FIP-image that contains U-Boot proper (u-boot.bin) and other firmware.
This file is verified by TF-A BL2 via a public key stored in BL2 device

> tree blob. This artifact may be signed (on closed boards) as a part of CI and

Reviewer: So the RoT HASH (of the public key) is stored as part of the BL2 image, but the public key itself is provided by the the fip image (https://trustedfirmware-a.readthedocs.io/en/latest/design/trusted-board-boot.html#chain-of-trust -> root of trust key / ROTPK).

Then when booting BL2 checks for the FIP signature (by reading and using ROTPK) and also verify that the ROTPK HASH matches ROT_HASH.

to also update the BL2 verification data prior to trying to boot the
new FIP-image.

MMC boot image layout
---------------------

Location of boot images depends on what boot media is being used.
On eMMC initiial boot images are flashed to *0x0* offset of the boot
hw partitions.

When SD is used as boot media, boot images different offsets are used within
the same HW partition. For additional details check **Flash layout file (eMMC boot)**
and **WKS layout (SD boot)** sections.

Update procedure
----------------

Primary vs Secondary boot paths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

STM32MP1 SoC supports booting of two copies of First Stage Boot Loaders:

-  First Stage Boot Loader Copy 1 (FSBL1)
-  First Stage Boot Loader Copy 2 (FSBL2)

Unfortunately SoC doesn't provide any mechanisms for user to control in
runtime what FSBL copy to boot, as only SoC ROM can make this decision based
on image authentication/checksum results, so this is why in our setup FSBL1
is considered as Primary boot path, and FSBL2 as a recovery path (Secondary
boot path), in case authentication/loading of FSBL1 fails.

libaktualizr and aktualizr-lite
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer 2: it feels like a leading text would make it easier to read.

maybe something such as:

"The libaktualizr and aktualizr-lite take some decisions during the boot phase. Those decisions are listed below following the same order from source code"

1. aktualizr-lite makes decision if boot firmware needs to be updated based
   on the contents of **${ostree\_root}/usr/lib/firmware/version.txt**,
   where ostree\_root is root of newly deployed ostree sysroot. Example
   of contents: **bootfirmware\_version=10**
2. After parsing bootfirmware\_version, it compares version number with
   the existing one, which is obtained via **fiovb** or **ubootenv**.
3. If bootfirmware\_version from version.txt is higher than existing
   one, aktualizr-lite sets **bootupgrade\_available** via **fiovb** or
   **ubootenv**.
4. Reboot should be performed.

U-Boot boot.cmd script
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 

Reviewer 2: leading text, something such as:

The following steps represent the boot path form the U-Boot perspective.

1. Actual update is done via U-Boot **boot.cmd** (boot.scr) script.
2. **boot.cmd** script checks if primary path is booted.
3. In case **upgrade\_available** is set the check if boot firmware
   upgrade is needed is done by looking into **bootupgrade\_available** flag.
   If both are true, boot firmware images are obtained from newly
   deployed ostree sysroot and then written to the primary boot path offsets.
   After that **bootupgrade\_primary\_updated** is set, and regular reset is
   issued.
4. After reboot SoC ROM tries to boot newly updated images from the primary
   boot path (FSBL1). If image verification fails, it automatically will fall
   back to FSBL2. If FSBL2 is booted (which means that verification of FSBL1
   failed), rollback procedure will be issued, and previous version of
   FSBL1 will be restored. If on the contrary FSBL1 is booted, but bootcount

>    hits bootlimit (that means that boot procedure haven't finished

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   hits bootlimit (that means that boot procedure hasn't finished
```

>    succesfully), rollback procedure will be also issued.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   successfully), rollback procedure will be also issued.
```

5. After Linux is booted aktualizr-lite confirms successful update by clearing
   **upgrade\_available** flag. At this point new boot firmware images are
   already validated. Additional reboot is needed after this step.
6. After reboot U-Boot checks if **bootupgrade\_primary\_updated** is set and
   **upgrade\_available** is cleared. This means that aktualizr-lite
   has confirmed succesful boot, and U-Boot clears
   **bootupgrade\_primary\_updated** flag. Otherwise **bootcount** value is
   incremented.

Add new board
-------------

meta-lmp
~~~~~~~~

Flash layout file (eMMC boot)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To deploy boot images to the destination board **STM32CubeProg** is used.
It uses special configuration file with **tsv** extension, that contains
eMMC flash layout (for additional details check the article in official
`documentation <https://wiki.st.com/stm32mpu/wiki/STM32CubeProgrammer_flashlayout>`_).
Taking into account that **STM32CubeProg** doesn't support defining of offsets
inside boot0/boot1 hw partitions, **TF-A BL2** and **FIP** are both combined
into one image in advance, adding correct padding between both,

> so they are are flashed to correct offsets during STM32CubeProg execution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so they are flashed to correct offsets during STM32CubeProg execution
```

    part fip2 --source rawcopy --fstype=ext4 --fsoptions "noauto" --part-name=fip-b --sourceparams="file=fip-stm32mp157c-dk2-optee.bin" --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 4096K
    part u-boot-env --source empty --part-name=uboot-env --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 16K --align 8192
    part / --source otaimage --ondisk mmcblk --fstype=ext4 --align 4096
    bootloader --ptable gpt

Test FSBL set and auth status
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After applying all updates from previous steps, we should validate that
everything is in place. Basically this consists of two basic steps:

- FSBL1 vs FSBL2 detection (primary or secondary path)
- Obtain board security state (results of FSBL authentication)

So to test FSBP copy detection check **boot\_part** part variable
using U-Boot shell:

::

    STM32MP> print boot_part
    boot_part=1

To check if the security status of your board is shown correctly, check
**boot\_auth** variable:

::

    STM32MP> print boot_auth
    boot_auth=0

Possible values are:

- **0** - No authentication done
- **1** - Authentication done and failed
- **2** - Authentication done and success

boot.cmd
~~~~~~~~

> Currently LmP uses template-based way of generation of final boot.cmd.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, LmP uses a template-based way of generation of the final boot.cmd.
```

It's constructed from common boot files
(*./meta-lmp-base/recipes-bsp/u-boot/u-boot-ostree-scr-fit/boot-common.cmd.in*),

> which contains all SoC agnostic DEFINEs and common functionality, and board
> specific boot.cmd, which is included boot-common.cmd.in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which contains all SoC agnostic DEFINEs and common functionality, and 
board-specific ``boot.cmd``, which is included ``boot-common.cmd.in``
```

    setenv backup_primary_image 'echo "${fio_msg} backing up primary boot image set ..."; mmc dev ${devnum} 1 && mmc read ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size} && mmc dev ${devnum} 2 && mmc write ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size}'
    setenv restore_primary_image 'echo "${fio_msg} restore primary boot image set ..."; mmc dev ${devnum} 2 && mmc read ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size} && mmc dev ${devnum} 1 && mmc write ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size}'

    setenv update_primary_image1 'setenv image_path "${ostree_root}/usr/lib/firmware/${bootloader_s_image}"; setenv start_blk "${bootloader_s}";  run load_image; run update_image_boot0'
    setenv update_primary_image2 'setenv image_path "${ostree_root}/usr/lib/firmware/${bootloader2_s_image}"; setenv start_blk "${bootloader2_s}";  run load_image; run update_image_boot0'

    setenv update_primary_image 'run update_primary_image1 && run update_primary_image2'

    @@INCLUDE_COMMON_ALTERNATIVE@@

sysroot and signed boot artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> All boot artifacts (TF-A BL2 and FIP) are automatically deployed
> to sysroot during build time, however on closed boards, where initial boot
> image has to be signed in advance by a subscriber private key, there is way to
> add signed binary instead of automatic inclusion of unsigned boot artifacts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All boot artifacts (TF-A BL2 and FIP) are automatically deployed
to sysroot during build time, however on closed boards, where the initial boot
image has to be signed in advance by a subscriber private key, there is a way to
add signed binary instead of automatic inclusion of unsigned boot artifacts.
```

> To do that just **lmp-boot-firmware.bbappend** to your *meta-subscriber-overrides*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do that just copy **lmp-boot-firmware.bbappend** to your *meta-subscriber-overrides*
```

> layer, adding proper value of PV (boot firmware version, which will be

Reviewer 2: I think I understand what "proper value" means here. But I'm adding this comment only to double-check if there is any special tip for readers on how to progress the PV value overtime.

`documentation <https://wiki.st.com/stm32mpu/wiki/STM32CubeProgrammer_flashlayout>`_).
Taking into account that **STM32CubeProg** doesn't support defining of offsets
inside boot0/boot1 hw partitions, **TF-A BL2** and **FIP** are both combined
into one image in advance, adding correct padding between both,
so they are flashed to correct offsets during STM32CubeProg execution
(concatenation is done automatically in `flashlayouts-stm32mp1.bb` recipe):

::

    $ cp tf-a-stm32mp157c-ev1-emmc.stm32 combo-emmc-tfa-fip-stm32mp157c-ev1.bin
    $ dd if=fip-stm32mp157c-ev1-optee.bin combo-emmc-tfa-fip-stm32mp157c-ev1.bin bs=1024 seek=256 conv=notrunc

Example of TSV file:

::

   #Opt	Id	Name		Type		IP	Offset		Binary
   -	0x01	fsbl-boot	Binary		none	0x0		tf-a-stm32mp157c-ev1-usb.stm32
   -	0x03	fip-boot	Binary		none	0x0		fip-stm32mp157c-ev1-optee.bin
   PD	0x04	fsbl1		Binary		mmc1	boot1		combo-emmc-tfa-fip-stm32mp157c-ev1.bin
   PD	0x05	fsbl2		Binary		mmc1	boot2		combo-emmc-tfa-fip-stm32mp157c-ev1.bin
   PED	0x06	u-boot-env	Binary		mmc1	0x00080000	none
   P	0x10	rootfs		System		mmc1	0x00100000	lmp-base-console-image-stm32mp15-eval.ext4

WKS layout (SD boot)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In SD setup two sets of FSBL images are stored with different offsets:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a SD setup, two sets of FSBL images are stored, each with different offsets:
```

- FSBL1 *17KB*
- FSBL2 *256KB*

> So support both FSBL images WKS file should be adjusted so both copies
> are placed at correct offsets:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To support both images, the WKS file should be adjusted so that both copies
are placed at the correct offsets:
```

::

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    part fsbl1 --source rawcopy --fstype=ext4 --fsoptions "noauto" --part-name=fsbl1 --sourceparams="file=tf-a-stm32mp157c-dk2-sdcard.stm32" --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 256K --align 17
    part fsbl2 --source rawcopy --fstype=ext4 --fsoptions "noauto" --part-name=fsbl2 --sourceparams="file=tf-a-stm32mp157c-dk2-sdcard.stm32" --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 256K
    part fip1 --source rawcopy --fstype=ext4 --fsoptions "noauto" --part-name=fip-a --sourceparams="file=fip-stm32mp157c-dk2-optee.bin" --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 4096K
    part fip2 --source rawcopy --fstype=ext4 --fsoptions "noauto" --part-name=fip-b --sourceparams="file=fip-stm32mp157c-dk2-optee.bin" --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 4096K
    part u-boot-env --source empty --part-name=uboot-env --ondisk mmcblk --part-type 0x8301 --fixed-size 16K --align 8192
    part / --source otaimage --ondisk mmcblk --fstype=ext4 --align 4096
    bootloader --ptable gpt

> Test FSBL set and auth status

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Testing FSBL Set and Auth Status
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> After applying all updates from previous steps, we should validate that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After applying the updates from previous steps, we should validate that
```

> everything is in place. Basically this consists of two basic steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
everything is in place. This consists of two steps:
```

- FSBL1 vs FSBL2 detection (primary or secondary path)
- Obtain board security state (results of FSBL authentication)

> So to test FSBP copy detection check **boot\_part** part variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To test FSBP copy detection, check the ``boot\_part`` variable
```

using U-Boot shell:

::

    STM32MP> print boot_part
    boot_part=1

To check if the security status of your board is shown correctly, check

> **boot\_auth** variable:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the ``boot\_auth`` variable:
```

::

    STM32MP> print boot_auth
    boot_auth=0

Possible values are:

- **0** - No authentication done
- **1** - Authentication done and failed
- **2** - Authentication done and success

boot.cmd
~~~~~~~~

> Currently, LmP uses a template-based way of generation of the final boot.cmd.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, LmP uses template-based generation for the final boot.cmd.
```

It's constructed from common boot files
(*./meta-lmp-base/recipes-bsp/u-boot/u-boot-ostree-scr-fit/boot-common.cmd.in*),

> which contains all SoC agnostic DEFINEs and common functionality, and 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which contains all SoC agnostic "DEFINEs" and common functionality, and 
```

    setenv update_image_boot0 'echo "${fio_msg} writing ${image_path} ..."; run set_blkcnt && mmc dev ${devnum} 1 && mmc write ${loadaddr} ${start_blk} ${blkcnt}'

    setenv backup_primary_image 'echo "${fio_msg} backing up primary boot image set ..."; mmc dev ${devnum} 1 && mmc read ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size} && mmc dev ${devnum} 2 && mmc write ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size}'
    setenv restore_primary_image 'echo "${fio_msg} restore primary boot image set ..."; mmc dev ${devnum} 2 && mmc read ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size} && mmc dev ${devnum} 1 && mmc write ${loadaddr} ${bootloader} ${bootloader_size}'

    setenv update_primary_image1 'setenv image_path "${ostree_root}/usr/lib/firmware/${bootloader_s_image}"; setenv start_blk "${bootloader_s}";  run load_image; run update_image_boot0'
    setenv update_primary_image2 'setenv image_path "${ostree_root}/usr/lib/firmware/${bootloader2_s_image}"; setenv start_blk "${bootloader2_s}";  run load_image; run update_image_boot0'

    setenv update_primary_image 'run update_primary_image1 && run update_primary_image2'

    @@INCLUDE_COMMON_ALTERNATIVE@@

> sysroot and signed boot artifacts

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sysroot and Signed Boot Artifacts
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> All boot artifacts (TF-A BL2 and FIP) are automatically deployed
> to sysroot during build time, however on closed boards, where the initial boot

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Boot artifacts (TF-A BL2 and FIP) are automatically deployed
to sysroot during build time. On closed boards however, where the initial boot
```

image has to be signed in advance by a subscriber private key, there is a way to

> add signed binary instead of automatic inclusion of unsigned boot artifacts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
add a signed binary instead of relying on the automatic inclusion of unsigned boot artifacts.
```

> To do that just copy **lmp-boot-firmware.bbappend** to your *meta-subscriber-overrides*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To do this, copy ``lmp-boot-firmware.bbappend`` to your ``meta-subscriber-overrides``
```

> layer, adding updated value of PV (boot firmware version, which will be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
layer, adding an updated value of PV (boot firmware version, which will be
```

automatically added to ${osroot}/usr/lib/firmware/version.txt file),
path to signed binary and signed binary itself.

> Versioning convention is up to user, the only requirement is that version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Versioning convention is up to user, the only requirement is that the version
```

The location of the boot image depends on what boot media is being used.
For eMMC, the initial boot images are flashed to a *0x0* offset of the boot
hw partitions.

When using a SD as boot media, boot images of different offsets are used within
the same HW partition. For additional details see :ref:`flash-layout-emmc`
and :ref:`wks-layout-sd`.

Update Procedure
----------------

Primary vs Secondary Boot Paths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The STM32MP1 SoC supports booting from two copies of First Stage Boot Loaders:

-  First Stage Boot Loader Copy 1 (FSBL1)
-  First Stage Boot Loader Copy 2 (FSBL2)

Unfortunately, the SoC does not provide any mechanisms for a user to control in
runtime what FSBL copy to boot —only the SoC ROM can make this decision based
on image authentication/checksum results. As such, the setup for FSBL1
is treated as the primary boot path, with FSBL2 as a recovery path (secondary
boot path) in case the authentication/loading of FSBL1 fails.

Libaktualizr and Aktualizr-lite
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Libaktualizr and Aktualizr-lite make decisions during the boot
phase. Those decisions are listed below, ordered as they appear in the source code:

> 1. aktualizr-lite makes the decision if boot firmware needs to be updated based
>    on the contents of ``${ostree\_root}/usr/lib/firmware/version.txt`,
>    where ``ostree\_root`` is root of newly deployed ostree sysroot.
>    For example, ``bootfirmware\_version=10``
> 2. After parsing ``bootfirmware\_version``, it compares version number with
>    the existing one, which is obtained via **fiovb** or **ubootenv**.
> 3. If ``bootfirmware\_version`` from ``version.txt`` is higher than existing
>    one, Aktualizr-lite sets ``bootupgrade\_available`` via **fiovb** or
>    **ubootenv**.
> 4. Reboot is to be performed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. aktualizr-lite makes the decision if boot firmware needs to be updated based
   on the contents of ``${ostree\_root}/usr/lib/firmware/version.txt`,
   where ``ostree\_root`` is root of newly deployed ostree sysroot.
   For example, ``bootfirmware\_version=10``.
   
2. After parsing ``bootfirmware\_version``, it compares version number with
   the existing one, which is obtained via **fiovb** or **ubootenv**.
   
3. If ``bootfirmware\_version`` from ``version.txt`` is higher than existing
   one, Aktualizr-lite sets ``bootupgrade\_available`` via **fiovb** or **ubootenv**.
   
4. Reboot is to be performed.
```
We will need to check that this renders correctly. Right now, the enumerated lists are cramped, so inserted newlines.

The U-Boot boot.cmd Script
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following steps represent the boot path from U-Boot's perspective.

> 1. The update is done via the U-Boot **boot.cmd** (boot.scr) script.
> 2. The **boot.cmd** script checks if the primary path was booted.
> 3. In case ``upgrade\_available`` is set, the script checks if a boot firmware
>    upgrade is needed by looking into ``bootupgrade\_available`` flag.
>    If both are true, boot firmware images are then obtained from the newly
>    deployed ostree sysroot and written to the primary boot path offsets.
>    Afterwards, ``ootupgrade\_primary\_updated`` is set, and a regular reset signal is
>    issued.
> 4. After the reboot, the SoC ROM tries to boot newly updated images from the primary
>    boot path (FSBL1). If image verification fails, it will automatically fall
>    back to FSBL2. When FSBL2 is booted, a rollback procedure will be issued,
>    the previous version of FSBL1 will be restored. If FSBL1  *does* boot, but *bootcount*
>    hits *bootlimit* (meaning the boot procedure has not finished
>    successfully), the rollback procedure will be also issued.
> 5. After Linux is booted, Aktualizr-lite confirms a successful update by clearing
>    the ``upgrade\_available`` flag. At this point, new boot firmware images are
>    already validated. An additional reboot is needed after this step.
> 6. After rebooting, U-Boot checks if ``bootupgrade\_primary\_updated`` is set and
>    if ``upgrade\_available`` is cleared. This means that Aktualizr-lite
>    has confirmed a successful boot, and U-Boot clears
>    ``bootupgrade\_primary\_updated`` flag. Otherwise the ``bootcount`` value is
>    incremented.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The update is done via the U-Boot **boot.cmd** (boot.scr) script.

2. The **boot.cmd** script checks if the primary path was booted.

3. In case ``upgrade\_available`` is set, the script checks if a boot firmware
   upgrade is needed by looking into ``bootupgrade\_available`` flag.
   If both are true, boot firmware images are then obtained from the newly
   deployed ostree sysroot and written to the primary boot path offsets.
   Afterwards, ``ootupgrade\_primary\_updated`` is set, and a regular reset signal is
   issued.
   
4. After the reboot, the SoC ROM tries to boot newly updated images from the primary
   boot path (FSBL1). If image verification fails, it will automatically fall
   back to FSBL2. When FSBL2 is booted, a rollback procedure will be issued,
   the previous version of FSBL1 will be restored. If FSBL1  *does* boot, but *bootcount*
   hits *bootlimit* (meaning the boot procedure has not finished
   successfully), the rollback procedure will be also issued.
   
5. After Linux is booted, Aktualizr-lite confirms a successful update by clearing
   the ``upgrade\_available`` flag. At this point, new boot firmware images are
   already validated. An additional reboot is needed after this step.
   
6. After rebooting, U-Boot checks if ``bootupgrade\_primary\_updated`` is set and
   if ``upgrade\_available`` is cleared. This means that Aktualizr-lite
   has confirmed a successful boot, and U-Boot clears
   ``bootupgrade\_primary\_updated`` flag. Otherwise the ``bootcount`` value is
   incremented.
```
